# Blog Post #1: Hello, World!

## Deciding on the stack and design
There weren't really any profound reasons for the technologies, languages, or libraries I used. It ultimately came down to their popularity, my interest in them, and whether or not I have used them before. I decided I would make this website using React since I have never really used React before. This could still change, but I will start with React. React is obviously overkill for what is essentially just plain text content, so I decided to introduce some automation to increase the complexity a tiny bit. If I needed a backend for anything I wanted to try out Go. I used AWS for hosting as th

Now, in my original attempt, I had considered using a Go file server that would just serve my static React files through an AWS EC2 instance. And this could still be the better option, but as of right now I've decided to host the React app in it's own repository and set up a Github Workflow to push changes to the S3 Bucket that is distributed via Cloudfront. The only thing left to do is create the main page and I want to create an automated system to upload posts by using this repository which will only have markdown files for each post. I plan on having my EC2 instance run a CRON job to pull the contents from this repository and copy the files into the Go file server directory. Then the React front end can dynamically retrieve new posts and add them to the website. I chose this polling mechanism over pushing as these aren't really time sensitive and running a commit hash comparison isn't all that expensive for a CRON job. As this repository grows in size it might be prudent to copy only new files or files that have changed between the new commit and the current local HEAD.

I chose markdown for blog post formats because it has a lot of support and the format is as close as you can get to universal for plain text rendering. I plan on using a Node library to parse and render the files into HTML on the client side and may try to write my own translator in the future. The other option is that I could have the Go server or some other mechanism translate the markdown posts into HTML and send the front end the preprocessed markdowns. I will look into that more in the future to see what tools are available it may just be easier to use some sort Unix tool before copying the files over. It is a micro EC2 instance so I figured the preprocessing isn't worth the extra stress, but this could change depending on what the Node library's performance looks like.

## Why I chose this method
If I wanted to just throw up a quick website I could have just used Squarespace or some other small website hosting service and that would have been valid considering how small the website was. I also could have just used Medium or some other website that relies on the users to be the content creators. I finally decided on the AWS approach to get some more experience with the platform even though I have used AWS RDS, EC2, S3, and Cloudfront before. I also wanted to go through the process of acquiring my own domain and setting that up.
